---
title: Changing the Social Media Paradigm
description: Why Twitter Can't Be Replaced By Decentralized Alternatives Like Bluesky and Fediverse.
date: 2024-11-07 01:40:00+0700
slug: social-media-paradigm
image: hero-image.webp
categories:
    - Opinion
    - Tech
tags:
    - yapping
    - social media
author: Nishimiya
---

Social media has revolutionized how we communicate, but the dynamics of major
platforms like Twitter have grown increasingly problematic. Despite its mass
appeal, Twitter’s model centers on engagement maximization, frequently elevating
divisive or controversial content that keeps users hooked and engaged for
profit. However, a wave of decentralized platforms, such as Mastodon, Bluesky,
and others on the Fediverse, offer an alternative approach that challenges
Twitter's engagement-driven model. Understanding the differences between these
platforms reveals why a shift in our approach to social media could benefit
society as a whole.

## The Twitter Model: Engagement at All Costs

Twitter's design has always prioritized engagement. Upon logging in, users are
bombarded with tweets that the platform’s algorithm considers likely to elicit
strong reactions. It’s no secret that highly engaging content often means
divisive, controversial, or sensational material. Posts from political extremes
or inflammatory "hot takes" are algorithmically favored because they drive
comments, shares, and responses, ultimately resulting in more time spent on the
platform.

Under Elon Musk's leadership, Twitter added a new revenue-driven dimension to
this engagement model. The introduction of subscription-based blue and gold
checkmarks exemplifies this shift, allowing users to boost their visibility for
a fee. The model incentivizes “pay-to-play” dynamics that reinforce Twitter’s
corporate-driven focus: maximizing attention and profit at the expense of
balanced, organic user engagement.

Additionally, Twitter’s centralized structure means that a single corporate
entity controls the algorithms, user data, and rules of engagement, shaping
content visibility according to business interests. In contrast, the rise of
decentralized social networks like Bluesky and the Fediverse offers a fresh
perspective on how social media could function more equitably.

## Decentralized Platforms: A New Social Media Paradigm

Unlike Twitter, platforms like Mastodon, Bluesky, and other Fediverse-based
networks operate on decentralized principles. This shift fundamentally changes
how users interact, curate content, and govern their social media experience. 

Bluesky, for instance, resembles Twitter’s interface, but it breaks away from
the engagement-first approach by using the “AT Protocol,” which decentralizes
social media hosting and management. Instead of an algorithmically driven feed
that maximizes engagement, Bluesky puts content control in users’ hands,
offering options like "More Posts Like This" or "Less Posts Like This." This
simple preference mechanism gives users greater agency in tailoring their feeds
without relying on corporate algorithms.

The AT Protocol also introduces a decentralized identity structure, often
abbreviated as DID (Decentralized Identifier). This protocol empowers users to
manage their online identity across different platforms without being tied to
a single corporate entity. A DID is a unique identifier that’s authenticated via
blockchain-like protocols, allowing users to move across compatible networks
while retaining their identity and data.

Moreover, Bluesky’s system allows users to register domain names as
usernames—something that costs as little as $1. This affordable, user-centric
identity structure contrasts with Twitter's blue-checkmark model, which offers
verification and engagement boosts at a premium. In essence, Bluesky values
accessibility and user autonomy over profit, opening a door for more equitable
social media practices.

## The Fediverse: A Decentralized Network of Social Platforms

In addition to Bluesky, the Fediverse is a collection of decentralized social
networks, each hosting independent communities while allowing cross-platform
interaction. Platforms like Mastodon operate on open-source protocols that
anyone can use to create their own social space, making it inherently
community-driven. Unlike Twitter’s top-down approach, the Fediverse enables
a bottom-up structure where individual servers (or “instances”) are
independently managed, giving power to the community rather than to a corporate
overseer.

This decentralized structure means that each community has its own moderation
rules and culture, reducing the influence of profit-driven algorithms and
allowing users to escape the echo chambers often exacerbated by mainstream
social media. The Fediverse encourages organic, interest-based networking, free
from engagement-manipulating algorithms, ultimately offering a healthier, more
intentional social media experience.

## Why This Shift Matters

As digital citizens, we must consider the impact of algorithm-driven engagement
on our online behavior and mental health. Twitter's centralized and
profit-oriented model fosters divisiveness and “doomscrolling,” but
decentralized platforms encourage users to make more intentional choices.
Decentralized social networks like Bluesky, Mastodon, and others in the
Fediverse are designed to prioritize user control, community governance, and
genuine interaction over sensationalism and profit.

This shift requires a collective change in mindset. Embracing decentralized
platforms means choosing a more user-centered approach to social media, one that
values authentic interaction over the “likes” and “shares” race. It’s a paradigm
shift that prioritizes our well-being and fosters healthier online communities. 

While Twitter may still hold a prominent place in the social media landscape,
its centralized, profit-driven model doesn’t have to be the default.
Decentralized networks like Bluesky and the Fediverse offer a new way forward,
one that we should seriously consider as we continue to navigate the complex
world of online communication.
